Speaker 1  0:00  
Good morning. This is Vince Caleb from the boys and center. How you doing today? I'm doing good. Thank you so much. Dr Kaleo, I really appreciate your time and your willingness to take this interview. Yeah, of

Speaker 2  0:12  
course, I have Allison mirabito on the other line. There's we normally have her just on calls. Case there's anything from the from the, you know, marketing and outreach side. So if it's okay with you, I'm just going to merge the calls and then happy to answer whatever I can for you. Yeah, definitely.

Unknown Speaker  0:30  
Okay. I'm going to try not to mess it up.

Unknown Speaker  0:36  
Okay, Allison, you should be on.

Unknown Speaker  0:39  
Yeah, hi. Great. Hi, thank you so much.

Unknown Speaker  0:45  
No problem. I'll just be here if you don't need anything.

Unknown Speaker  0:48  
Okay, yeah, of course. Thank you so much.

Speaker 1  0:52  
Um So, Dr kalio, are gonna record the whole interview for my future. Writing references it. Okay, yeah. Sure thing, thank you. Um, so, first of all, I want to ask about the data itself. So I noticed the like three like, the row four is like, total cannabis human Expo exposure cases for selected age range. Like, could you explain the age range from like, Yeah, sure.

Speaker 2  1:23  
So when we look at things from a poison center standpoint, typically the categories that we use to look at different ages, it really helped to break children and adolescents down into different categories where we may see more or less different types of exposures. So the way that we typically think about things are ages ranged from zero to five years of age, ages six years to 12 years, and ages 13 to 19 years. And once we get over 19 years into 20 and above, that falls into the what we would classify as the adult category. So in terms of the edible cannabis products. What we what we do is we look at different exposure trends and things like that. And what we find is that, you know, some of the largest number of calls that we get for edible cannabis products are these unintentional exposures in pediatric patients who are between the ages of zero to five. And we start to see the calls for edible marijuana products with the ages of six to 12 and 13 to 19 are, historically, at least with us, smaller than the number of calls we get for the, you know, for the children that are between the ages of zero to five. And, you know, looking at the numbers that we have for 2025 we found that, at least in terms of the edible cannibal or, I'm sorry, the edible cannabis products, we found that children between the ages of zero to five had about 114 exposures, as opposed to the ages six to 12 that had 48 and the ages of 13 to 19 that have 46 so that was kind of the breakdown of the age ranges that we have for pediatric patients. For 2025 in terms of the exposures to animal cannabis products

Speaker 1  3:11  
got it so, like the age range, like I so like from the row six, the exposure substance, and the is, age group is not the time the kind of like attach or like exposed to substance, right?

Unknown Speaker  3:31  
Would you mind

Speaker 2  3:34  
just rephrasing that question? Yeah, 100% sure what you have for I just want to make sure I'm answering the right question for you, yeah,

Speaker 1  3:40  
of course. So my question is the row six, did you pull up the Excel as well? Yep, yeah. So the question is, like the five years, six to 1230, to 90 years like those are the age is not the time the exposure, like the exposed to substance.

Speaker 2  4:06  
Yes, I'm so sorry about that. Yeah. So in column C, D, for the Yeah, the less than or equal to five years, six to 12 and 13 to 19, that represents the ages of the children and not the duration of the

Speaker 1  4:21  
exposure, understand. Thank you so much for explaining that then. So do you see any trend, like between a span of time that the the car tell tell us other story?

Speaker 2  4:41  
Yeah, that's a really great question. So when we think about the exposure over a period of time, one that I usually think about as being some of the most relevant for what we've seen at the poison center really is in the unintentional exposures to children that are less than six years of age, so that zero to five age range, what we found is that in the year 2019, I don't have the exact numbers, but the number of exposures we had was substantially lower than what we have seen in more recent years, where I believe that the number of exposures in that age range was under 10, so single digits. And once we look at the next few years, we see that I believe in 2023 was when we really had our highest number of unintentional pediatric exposures to cannabis products, particularly the edible ones, in the zero to five age range. And that number, I believe, was just shy of 200 cases in 2023 and we have seen that number start to come down a little bit, you know, in 24 and in 25 and you see here that, you know, in the zero to five age range for the unintentional exposures to edible products of marijuana in 2025 was 114 cases that zero to five age range. Now, on the surface it might look like this number really is showing an improvement, and that not as funny kids are being exposed. But one of the things I always just, you know, advise people of is to take that with a little bit of caution, because as a policeman center, we do an amazing job at keeping track of cases that we get called on. But one thing that I think a lot of people don't realize is that reporting cases to the poison center isn't something that everyone has to do in the hospital, and so over the last few years, we've been seeing more exposures to edible products in those younger children, and many providers in emergency departments and in hospitals are comfortable taking care of those cases. So sometimes they don't always call them in and in fact, there was a study that came out that some of my colleagues and I worked on within the last year that showed that the number of calls to the poison center for edible products exposures in this age range is lower than the number of exposures that are seen at the hospitals. So I think that this number might actually under represent how many exposures are actually occurring. But I do feel, you know, somewhat reassured that the number is starting to go down. I'd rather have it go down and go up for sure, right? I think it's just important to remember that it doesn't mean that the number of exposures truly is that much lower. And my long story short, and takeaway with this is I think it's so important for all of us as healthcare professionals to help inform the public that we always need to ensure that people who are choosing to use edible cannabis products are taking some of those simple steps to help keep kids safe, and that includes keeping things out of sight and out of reach of children not using the products anywhere near a child where they might see, you know, a parent or a family member eating a piece of candy or something that looks like because then the child might think that that is okay for them to do too. And you know, some of those simple things that you can do, including using the medication lockbox, can really help to reduce the chances of exposure. So I feel good that the number is down a little bit more, but I think it's just so important to make sure we know the limitations of that and to make sure we remember that those simple steps that we can take can really help keep kids safe.

Speaker 1  8:14  
Yeah, so I'm wondering, dr, kalio, if you could send me like, maybe, like, most five years data that I can, kind of, like, have a line chart to show exactly how the how the changes in those age group. It okay, like, more data.

Speaker 2  8:37  
Yeah, let me take a look and see what we're able to provide, I think in terms of at least the exposure to edible cannabis products over that period of time for the kids between the ages of 05 that's certainly something we can have for you. And in fact, our Assistant Clinical Director, Dr Willie Eggleston, did a presentation on some emerging drug trends for a webinar last month. And on there, he actually had a slide that shows a line chart there. I'll touch base with him and see if he's able to just send that over to me, because I can get it to you pretty quickly, and so that way you can take a look and see if that's something that's useful for you. But I'd be more than happy to touch base with him on that and see what we can get. And if it's okay, you want me to just email it to Allison and have her send it to you? Or what would be the easiest thing from that end?

Speaker 1  9:22  
Yeah, yeah, um, like, maybe, um, Allison can just send it to me, and I really appreciate your help.

Speaker 2  9:29  
Oh, yeah, of course, I'd be more than happy to send that along. And yeah, I'll get that from him, as long as he's proud of that. And then sure we can get that probably within the next 15 to 20 minutes. Yeah, thank you.

Speaker 1  9:41  
Dr Kelly, oh, so I have a question about the product. I noticed like the top product is edible. So are there any particular format, like gummies, chocolate drinks that keep recurring?

Speaker 2  9:58  
Boy, you know, that's that's a really great question. And unfortunately, I don't have a perfect answer for you from the poison center side of things, because the way that things work from from the reporting standpoint, is, when we get a call for an edible product, it's not typically broken down into, you know, what type of edible product it was, whether it was a gummy or a chocolate or a baked good or a drink. We don't have that that level of data, because most of the time the callers don't provide it to us. They'll say that, you know, child or someone was exposed to an edible but they normally don't provide us with the, you know, with the exact type that it was. I can tell you anecdotally, though, we have seen a number of different products out there that, have you know, been things that kids have been exposed to. And just like you mentioned, it does include a number of things, including some of those ones, like, like gummy products, like ones that, you know, resemble baked goods, you know, brownies, cookies, those types of things, certainly chocolate. And there are some that are out there that are not, that are that are made, that haven't been regulated by New York State. And so when that, you know, when that happens, those ones might resemble other candy bars and things New York State's really done a great job with her office, her office of cannabis management to try to, you know, reduce how appealing edible cannabis products can be to kids, but for the ones that are made, you know, illicitly, those ones don't follow the same standards that New York States work so hard to apply. And so I think it's important to recognize that the ones that aren't regulated through the state, I think are even more dangerous for kids because they're more likely to look like, you know, tasty sweets that kids are familiar with.

Speaker 1  11:48  
Yeah, so when we see popular product in poison center costs either because it's widely used or because it's more likely to cause a bad outcome.

Speaker 2  12:01  
You know, that's, that's a good question. When we when we think about, you know, exposures that we see to kids, I think that part of the part of the reason that we've seen more calls is because, with the legalization of candidates within the state, I think there's just more available than there was before. And if we're thinking about, just some statistics, if there's more around, it's probably more likely that a kid is going to just have an unintentional exposure to it. So that's why I think it's so important to make sure that we're trying to educate the public and remind people that some of those simple steps that they can take to keep kids safe, including keeping things high, out of sight, out of reach, using medication lock boxes, you know, if they're choosing to take an edible or product, maybe eating it over a sink, so that way, if it falls, it doesn't get on the floor and get lost, and then a kid can get exposed to it later. I think those are some of those simple things that people can do to help keep them safe. And I will say, a lot of the calls that we do get to the poison center for kids, fortunately, have very good outcomes, right? And if it's a relatively small exposure a child might have, you know, some some mild effects where they might be a little bit lightheaded, maybe bumping into stuff, their coordination might be not or might not be normal. But we do get calls to for, you know, some more severe things too. And we have had cases in the state where small children had gotten into large amounts of an edible who have been, you know, really sleepy for a long period of time. Some of them have had features. Others have required a breathing tube in order to help keep them safe. So it's really important to just remember that, you know, well, adults normally don't have as severe of outcomes with cannabis exposures. Kids certainly can get extremely sick from them, and can have some of those dangerous things like we talked about, including seizures, altered level of consciousness, and, you know, changing or changes in their breathing. And sometimes they need breathing tubes, and sometimes it can actually make their heart rate go up or go down, which, particularly for a child, can be very dangerous.

Speaker 1  14:09  
Got it so? Dr Kelly, oh, for teens like age between and 13 to 19, like, what a slip between accidental exposure versus intentional use like and what are the situation that most often trigger a poison center clock?

Speaker 2  14:28  
So I think that that 13 to 19 is is an interesting age because it's a little bit different where things kind of shift from the younger children, where it's that zero to five and more often the younger end of the six to 12 ages, where the exposure tends to be unintentional, where they get into something by accident. Once kids get into that 13 to 19 age range, we start to see more of a shift towards that intentional use, because in that age group, it's not uncommon to see, you know, teenagers experimenting with other substances, including things like cannabis. And so it's not uncommon to see the shift from the unintentional use to the intentional use. Oftentimes, what will prompt a call to to the poison center from an emergency department or from a hospital, though, is when a child is brought in because they're having more severe effects than one might expect from a from just simple cannabis use and so on. So things that are going to be a little bit different than a child, you know, seeming like they're, quote, unquote, maybe a little bit high, usually, if that's the case and that's the only effect they're having, most emergency departments are comfortable managing that and don't call the poison center. So we don't hear about those ones, but the ones that we can get calls for tend to be ones where it's more severe, where it's taking maybe longer for a child to return to their normal baseline. If they took too much of the cannabis, they certainly could have changes in their mental status, where they're really sleepy or have an altered level of consciousness. You know, sometimes they can also have some just some other effects that worry medical providers, and so they like to have us help to weigh in on those. So in those scenarios there, it's usually, I think, because when someone uses an edible product, especially if it's their first time, they might expect it to kick in very quickly after they take it. But it's important to remember that the edible products work more slowly than the smoking of cannabis, and so sometimes a kid might go ahead and take an edible and say, Well, I didn't feel anything, so I took another one and I didn't feel anything, so I took another one and I didn't feel anything, so I took another one, and then all of a sudden, 3060, sometimes even 90, minutes later, everything hits them all at once, and they just aren't aware that they shouldn't have taken that much. So I think that, again, making sure people know about these products is important, and obviously it's not legal in that age group anyway, so just trying to do whatever we can as professionals to help educate kids to keep them safe, is something that certainly is

Speaker 1  17:02  
very important. Yeah, so are you seeing more high potency concentrates or, like on vibing devices involved in teen teen?

Unknown Speaker  17:12  
Cause? That's a good question. I don't just trying to think here.

Speaker 2  17:22  
It's a little bit tricky, because for most of the calls that we get, we don't know what the concentration was. I will say, in more recent years, we have seen vaping emerge as a way that people will use cannabis to get high, and that, you know, can involve, you know, using more higher concentrations of cannabis, and again, with vaping products, some of them are made legally through the state, and others are made illegally and not regulated. So you know, the ones that aren't regulated have concentrations, or could have concentrations that are higher than we'd expect. And the other thing that we think about is something called dabbing, which is another way that, you know, marijuana products can be used. And essentially, that's using a concentrated form of THC to get high. So that's, that's another form that we have, you know, encountered before, too, with people, both, you know, from an intentional use standpoint and from an intentional use

Speaker 1  18:27  
standpoint I see. And then are you saying cannabis cases become more medically serious over time, or just more frequently?

Speaker 2  18:36  
You know, that's a great question again. And I think that I would say yes to both. I have seen over the last several years, if we're looking at trends, the number of cases certainly increase, and in particular with that zero to five age range, I work in both pediatric emergency medicine and in adult emergency medicine, along with toxicology. And I'd say that from my personal practice, I've certainly seen the number of edible exposures in that zero to five age range go up a lot over the last few years. And I have seen an increase in the number of complex or complex cases as well, and those tend to be most in those younger patients too, between the ages of zero and five, simply because if a child gets into an edible product, you know, let's say that there's a chocolate bar, and the dose an adult is supposed to take is one square. A child doesn't have that degree of restraint normally and will eat the entire thing. So because they're taking in so much more typically their their time in the emergency department and hospital is going to be more complicated and more severe than it would be if an adult was to just take, you know, one square of

Speaker 1  19:50  
that piece of chocolate I see. And one last question, what is the single most misunderstood thing about edible that or like vaping that leads to overdosing, especially like among teens or young adults.

Speaker 2  20:06  
I think the thing that I think leads to the highest likelihood of a teenager or young adult having too much cannabis is with edible products, not understanding how long it takes them to work, because, like we talked a little bit about, before they might expect to get high from an edible product at the same time that they would expect to get high if they were to smoke. And normally, when you smoke something, you get high pretty quickly, and the hide lasts for a shorter period of time than it would than an edible edibles normally take longer to feel the effects, but they often tend to last longer, too, and so I think that's one of the things that you know is most likely to cause people to have the, you know, those type of scenarios where they might overdose and have too much THC, it's because they take one edible thinking It's going to work quickly, and they don't feel anything. So then they take more than one and then all of a sudden, they feel all the effects a little bit later, and it hits them pretty hard.

Speaker 1  21:11  
Got it? That's all the question that I appear. And I just wondering if there's anything that I didn't mention, but you think is worth bringing out the bell, bring up a bell.

Speaker 2  21:21  
Yeah, that's a good question. I think the biggest thing that I would probably just remind everyone in the public hub is that the poison center is always available to them, fast, free and confidential. 24/7 365, regardless of where they are in the state or even really across the country, they can always call that toll free 1-800-222-1222, number anytime, day or night, and they'll always have access to, you know, fast, free, confidential, professional advice from people who were trained to help manage these exposures. So we're always happy to help anyone that we can, and our job is to just try to keep everyone, you know, every patient and every loved one safe. So anything we can do to help with that is something we always want to remind the public. We're always here and happy to help. And then just those simple steps we talked about before reminding anyone who's using edible products to keep them out of sight, out of reach, use medication, lock boxes and take some of those simple steps to help avoid unintentional exposure. Those are just all great ways to help keep family members, children and sometimes even you know, elderly adults, you know, safe from unintentional exposures.

Speaker 1  22:29  
Yeah, that's really good saying. Thank you so much. Dr Kelly, I know your day is fully packed, and thank you so much for willing to talk with us as well as you're sharing so many insight for this data. Can we keep in touch.

Unknown Speaker  22:50  
Yeah, definitely go ahead.

Speaker 3  22:57  
I was just going to say, Do you have any questions for us in regards to how the poison center works and where we cover just before we get off.

Speaker 1  23:07  
Actually, I really want to ask that question, but I thought it's better to, like, email you, because I know, like, Dr callio is pretty busy, so I don't know whether it's very basic question to ask, but yeah, please let me know, like, the answer of that question. Thank you so much, Allison, that is really good. Add up.

Speaker 3  23:27  
Do you want me to email her? Told me to email her and explain that?

Speaker 2  23:31  
Oh yeah, that would be great, if you wouldn't mind. And I'll tell you what, if you want to wait just a minute, Allison, I'll just touch base with Willie to make sure that he's okay with me sharing that slide that has those numbers and that line trend on the grace and ask for so I'll send that to you, so then you can just send that ring over to her, if that's okay with you. Yeah, that's perfect. Okay, all right. Thanks so much, right, Grace. It was nice to chat with you. If you need anything, don't hesitate to reach out. And thanks for all your help and spreading some great messaging to everybody.

Unknown Speaker  23:56  
Yeah, thank you so much. I really appreciate Have a great day. Thank you. Usual, take care,

Unknown Speaker  24:02  
bye, Dr kalio, bye, Allison.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
